and
i think that i'd had a little taste you
know growing up in the suburbs i'd had
this little taste of
something bigger than me in the natural
world and i think that humans
find some clarity in our meaning and our
place in the universe when we stand in
front of things that are bigger than us
and that can be technology that can be
city that can be art that can be
creative processes and that can be a
mountain or an ocean or an avalanche
right and so that was where i went
because i had that little piece of
nature being bigger and kind of wild
hey everyone welcome to health theory
today's guest is dr paul saladino md
he's a certified functional medicine
practitioner who completed his medical
residency in psychiatry
at the university of washington he's
taken a pretty unconventional path to
where he is today participating in ultra
marathons and spending two years hiking
and skiing the tetan mountains of
wyoming as well as extended periods
exploring the back country of the
southwestern united states and the wilds
of new zealand through all of his
physical endeavors he's gained a
powerful appreciation for the impact
that nutrition plays on our strength
endurance and overall well-being and
that was precisely what led him to
getting his md and i want to start in
the back country that was like such a
unexpected turn of events for me and
that you took a lot of time off before
you went and got your md
and i can see in your eyes like there's
something uh
very exploratory about the path you've
taken um what is all that backcountry
stuff about
i think for me it was just about
exploration and curiosity and wanting to
understand where i could find meaning
i grew up in a pretty normal household
in suburban virginia
you know i was raised in the east coast
my dad's a physician my mom's a nurse so
i saw medicine a lot growing up and i
had a pretty normal path until i
finished college
i had a couple of professors in college
who incidentally had like really big
curly hair you know like every nutty
professor does and they just opened my
eyes to some interesting things i got
interested in philosophy and buddhism
and meditation
and i got interested in the natural
world which i had only seen a piece of
being a suburban kid growing up right
and i thought wow this is what i really
want to go explore i'm not ready to go
into medicine because what i had seen up
to that point from what i'd seen from my
dad and his colleagues was a lot of
people in medicine weren't that happy
these are practicing physicians and a
lot of patients weren't really getting
that well that was the first point that
i was like losing my religion thinking i
want to be a doctor but doctors aren't
happy
patients don't seem to really always be
getting as well as i would hope and i
got to go exploring i just gotta put
everything on the back burner and at
that point i didn't even know it was on
the back burner i just figured i was
done and i was like i'm gonna go and
just be an explorer my whole life
interesting okay so uh talk to me about
the buddhism thing so i went through a
hardcore eastern philosophy phase in my
sort of end of high school beginning of
college really explored that found a ton
of benefit in that um
what was that about for you how has it
impacted you do you carry any of that
still with you absolutely so
my spirituality
was perhaps a similar sort of path i was
raised catholic and
personally never really resonated with
it i respect christianity and
catholicism extremely and i think
there's beautiful traditions and i think
a lot of the christian teachings are so
valuable but i never really found a
whole lot of resonance there when i was
growing up
when i found buddhism and just these
concepts of non-impermanence and
suffering and how to release suffering
and really mindfulness as the first
piece of that and mindfulness leading to
compassion and empathy that
grabbed me and it was probably just the
point in my life where i was
but starting to meditate a little bit as
like a 19 or 20 year old i mean imagine
a 19 year old mind
and starting to meditate it's like
trying to corral a wild horse right but
it's a good process it's an important
process and that was
the beginning of a lot of learning for
me and just thinking about things
philosophically
you know you think about
scientific disciplines right you get
biology is very macro you can see things
i can see this amoeba then i can get to
microbiology i'm talking about bacteria
then i'm getting to like molecular
biology i'm talking about dna and
transcription factors and then you know
chemistry you can think about general
chemistry the movement of atoms and then
you can get into atomic quantum
chemistry and then you're really into
physics what's after that it's sort of
like philosophy and buddhism right i
mean if you keep going and you keep sort
of like expanding the lens and pulling
the microscope back
after quantum you sort of get into that
philosophical realm like what are we
made out of and
you're asking questions about who we are
as humans and what life is about and
what this experience is about and where
meaning comes from and i think that
lends itself to exploration through
meditation through mindfulness all of
these things and i think that's the
natural continuum beyond quantum
questions
what are we made of anyway and then you
start thinking what what have people
thought of and the philosophical things
start to become relevant and you start
to meditate and think like where am i
and you look up the sky and you think
what am i doing here
and it's with that then that we go off
and we're skiing in the tetan mountains
and we're exploring southwestern u.s
like so this is something i think a lot
about like you can capture these really
interesting mental states they are hyper
ephemeral but the desire to hold on to
that sense of awe and wonder is so
profound um and i actually this is
interesting i'm so curious to know if
this is what was driving you so at the
end of high school
i was telling my mom once i graduate
from college i'm actually going to go
backpack around china
i was obsessed with taoism i was
obsessed with laozi and the daodejing
and so it was like there was just
something i wanted to go experience that
sort of the imagery that you see in a
lot of chinese art from around that
period of like the the really exotic
mountains they do mountains very
different than we do oh i know it's
beautiful and so i had like this real
obsession with going and experiencing
that because i wanted to hold on to that
that sense of oh
was that part of what was pushing you i
think it was
and
i think that i'd had a little taste you
know growing up in the suburbs i'd had
this little taste of
something bigger than me in the natural
world and i think that humans
find some clarity in our meaning and our
place in the universe when we stand in
front of things that are bigger than us
and that can be technology that can be
city that can be art that can be
creative processes and that can be a
mountain or an ocean or an avalanche
right and so that was where i went
because i had that little piece of
nature being bigger and kind of wild
and i just wanted to see what it felt
like to be
in these places that were bigger than me
i wanted to feel small i don't think i
knew this at the time but in retrospect
i have a sense of it what was the plan
though like how were you going to make
money no plans exploring no plan how old
were you i was 20 21. i was fortunate to
have gone to a state school you know
william mary was a state school wasn't
extremely expensive
and i didn't have a lot of debt i didn't
have any debt at the time i had kind of
a junker car that would break down
frequently but that was all that's all i
needed all i needed was
the clothes on my back and the ability
to go explore something when does that
begin to change
because you end up coming full circle
back to the md thing which is really
surprising because you took a look at it
your family was in it you rejected it so
how do you end up coming back to it i
think that eventually
the intellectual curiosity rose you know
i sort of had my time in the wilderness
after six years i was 26 27.
what am i gonna do with my life you know
i had that sort of blissful peter pan
time to just go exploring and do my
adventuring and connect with all these
pieces of the natural world and the
other curiosity kind of rose again from
the depths you know atlantis rose up and
was like oh yeah i have questions about
what makes people healthy and not
healthy and i think that would be
a good thing and a meaningful thing for
me to pursue for my career and it wasn't
until i got into medicine as a physician
assistant in cardiology that then i saw
firsthand what the practice of medicine
meant what it looked like when the
rubber met the road and then i started
to think oh man
the medicine that i'm seeing here is not
really what i'd hoped and people are
really not getting better because it's
all drug-based because it's all
drug-based because it's all
symptom-focused
with the success of penicillin and
infectious disease we used that paradigm
for the whole rest of medicine and it
works in the acute phase but it doesn't
work for chronic disease and it was kind
of at that point in my pa career my
physician assistant career in cardiology
that i thought okay
nutrition is what's going to move the
needle food is your biggest leverage as
a pa
one thing you've said that i think is
really interesting and i'd love to know
how a guy who's already sort of awoken
to the power of nutrition deals with
going into studying traditional medicine
where they don't talk about nutrition
but um
you've said uh very powerfully that
people think you know about the drugs
they take and they're measured in
micrograms or whatever you said i don't
think that's the exact word but then we
take in like kilograms worth of food
explain why that's a powerful concept so
what i mean by that is if people are
familiar with medications metoprolol
benicar lysinopril whatever medication
they take for blood pressure amlodipine
and they look at the bottle you get from
the pharmacist it'll say amlodipine 5
milligrams that's a one thousandth of a
gram
and then you look in your kitchen and
you open your refrigerator and you have
hot dogs or bread or steak or eggs
you're looking at kilogram your you know
kilogram is thousand one thousand grams
versus one one thousandth of a gram
these are multiple orders of magnitude
different we're talking ten thousand
times different scale in these things
but ultimately what we're talking about
now is just molecules that we're all
made up of molecules we're all run by
biochemistry which is molecules and
we're pretty good at predicting the way
that molecules work and so whether you
take in a milligram quantity of a
molecule called amlodipine or you take
in a kilogram quantity of hot dogs which
are you know thousands and thousands of
molecules you're doing the same thing in
your body that hot dog gets made into
the same thing that amlodipine does it's
just lots of biochemical signals in your
body you're giving your body information
you're giving your body signals and so
i've never really understood why
mainstream and western medicine doesn't
get this right why don't we understand
that food is signal and that food is
information going into our bodies food
is a program that we are loading into
the computer of our bodies every day and
that's coming in from molecules and the
environment right it could be sun it can
be cold
but the biggest download the biggest
amount of information coming to us is
food and i would argue it is the biggest
lever for health and disease so this is
one of those things i i actually don't
understand at a very fundamental level
why people push back on that can you
steal man the argument of why people say
it's just calories in calories out
because the second somebody said this
isn't just everything is the same
it's signaling molecules there's
hormonal responses to food there's all
these different responses and it was
sort of instantly like oh that makes
sense the base assumption may be
incorrect i guess but there's so much
internal logic that once i accept that
they're
signaling molecules the cascade of
things that make sense after that are
pretty profound but people push back on
that [__] and i've never quite
understood so is there
are
they saying that
there is a what i'll call a presentation
layer to macronutrients that can
manifest as a hot dog or manifest as
cauliflower or whatever
it's just a reorganization of the same
sort of fundamental molecules and so no
matter what the presentation layer is
what matters is the macronutrient the
carbohydrate the fat the protein you
know
i've heard some people in the space
suggest
that
calories in calories out is as simple as
you could eat pop-tarts all day and take
a multivitamin it would be the same
thing and i obviously don't believe this
i think it's like a reductionist
perspective and it misses the entire
immunologic and hormonal response to
foods which is so nuanced and i think
that at some level they're saying
there's no research to prove that that's
valuable and there's no research that
can dissect it all out because it's so
complicated so the only thing we can
look at are macronutrients and then for
micronutrients we just give you a
multivitamin it's interesting so you
quoted uh
jeff bezos
and you said bezos says when your
studies disagree with the anecdotal
evidence your your
studies have a problem not the anecdotal
evidence well you need to re-examine the
data you're getting yeah that makes a
lot of sense to me so in researching i
was talking to my wife lisa she's had
massive microbiome issues and so all of
a sudden i got thrust from the notion
that
um
like what your food ate doesn't really
matter like once it's a steak it's a
steak and you know sort of the again the
presentation layer
doesn't really matter it's the the
macronutrient content and so even though
i didn't think a calorie was a calorie i
thought by the time you boil it down to
something as simple as it it's just
[__] animal tissue like you're ready
to rock and roll and then watch her you
could you could blindfold her she'd have
no idea and she can tell you from the
way that she feels if something was
grass-fed or corn-fed it's freaky i
never would have [__] believed it but
she'll have real problems from stuff so
i was like okay clearly there's
something more that's going on and so
when i think about somebody saying oh
pop tarts and a multivitamin are going
to play out the same it's like
you could all the money in the world
would never convince lisa that that's
true because experientially she just
doesn't like get down like that so one
of the things that's interesting about
the
um the carnivore diet is the hypothesis
that you've explained very well which is
forget even macronutrients for a second
plants contain
antinutrients and the anti-nutrients
themselves cause a problem right what
what are anti-nutrients is that not a
problem in the pop-tart hypothesis
well
it's absolutely a problem in the
pop-tart hypothesis i think i understand
your question because pop-tarts have
lots of plant foods and have lots of
anti-nutrients in them as well yeah even
just like straight sugar is in an
antinutrient or a potentially
dangerous nutrient in some ways if we're
thinking about things in terms of
fructose being a dangerous molecule for
humans and really what we're getting to
here is the nuanced idea that the
devil's in the details and that a
grass-fed steak
and a grain-fed steak can look pretty
similarly in terms of macronutrient
ratios fat protein carbohydrates but in
terms of micronutrients and other
molecules they're completely different
there's pretty good evidence that
grass-fed meat will have higher
concentration of nutrients vitamin c
vitamin e and beta-carotene were the
three nutrients that they looked at in
grass-fed meat relative to grain-fed
meat in this paper
and then also what they looked at were
the amounts of glutathione reduced and
oxidized and glutathione is this major
molecular
antioxidant policeman in the human body
it's our endogenous antioxidant currency
that runs around
getting rid of free radical
molecules or free electrons on molecules
which are free radicals so there's more
glutathione in grass-fed meat which is a
good thing for us and there's more of
these nutrients so what a basic
micronutrient level which is vitamins
and minerals a grass-fed steak is richer
in those but i think that the biggest
difference between grass-fed and
grain-fed steak is the things that the
grass-fed steak doesn't contain which i
would argue are toxins in the fed steak
and this is coming from what is sprayed
on the grains that are fed to the grass
the grain-fed animals glyphosate
glyphosate and atrazine and potentially
a molecule called xerolinone which is a
mycotoxin that is formed in moldy grains
but we don't really know what glyphosate
does in the human body right now it
appears to disrupt a pathway without
getting too granular a folate pathway in
bacteria called the shikimate pathway
glyphosate could be a real disruptor of
our gut microbiome which may be you know
relevant to your wife
and also there have been a number of
court decisions recently people may be
aware of
where the court has ruled in favor of
people saying that glyphosate exposure
gave them cancer these are people who
are using large amounts of glyphosate to
spray college campuses groundskeepers
things like this people may know that
glyphosate is roundup and you can walk
into home depot and see a wall
of glyphosate there which is pretty
scary right so glyphosate is a big thing
and that's water soluble that's going to
be a higher concentration in grain-fed
meat because they're fed grains
for the last part of their life the
other thing is the corn they're feeding
them is sprayed with atrazine which is
this lipid-soluble toxin and atrazine is
part of a family of compounds called
xenoestrogens and these are compounds
that can affect our hormones
specifically estrogen
by mimicking estrogen in the human body
so when you're eating a grass-fed steak
you're getting less of those and a
grain-fed steak is going to have all
sorts of extra compounds in it again
it's just the molecules if we could see
the molecules in a grass-fed and green
physique they look different they're
pretty similar but the one percent
is important you know that one percent
can be very bioactive we know that these
estrogen mimicking molecules molecules
like glyphosate can be very bioactive at
very small concentrations in the human
body when we're talking about plants and
plant toxins that's a whole other issue
but it's perhaps very parallel plants do
make molecules they make these small
molecules to defend themselves against
insects and predation by herbivores and
those small molecules can have similar
effects in the human body
in fact there are a whole there's a
whole class of compounds called
flavonoids people probably heard of
flavonoids they're often touted as a
good thing but we know that flavonoid
molecules mimic estrogen in the human
body as well there are papers that would
show that flavonoid molecules can
activate the 17 beta estradiol receptor
which is just our body's estrogen
receptors so why is that bad though
because it's it's changing our hormonal
signaling so we're taking in a molecule
from a plant that the plant has made as
a pigment
and then it is programming our biology
in a way that we're not expecting it's
bad for men because excess estrogen
causes gynecomastia which is the
formation of man boobs or lowers
testosterone competes with testosterone
for metabolism or effects in the human
body it's bad for women because higher
levels of estrogen can affect the
balance of other hormones can affect
cycling the menstrual cycle can affect
perhaps breast cancer rates and all
these things that's just one example of
a plant toxin but these molecules the
details are so interesting
yeah so
that brings us to the carnivore diet so
what is the carnivore diet exactly
because i think people think it's eating
hamburgers all day um and so breaking
that down would be really helpful yeah
so i was going through medical school
thinking about
food and thinking about food as a big
lever and i went back to medical school
with the intention of becoming
a functional medicine physician but
throughout the process i was always
trying to iterate for myself my n of one
my test tube
how do i function on different diets
what does my body feel like look like
perform like
when i'm doing different things and
what's the ideal way to eat for most of
medical school and residency i was
pretty almost entirely organic paleo
which i think is a great base but one
thing kept nagging me and it was i had
eczema and it reminded me or it signaled
to me personally that
even though i was eating what i
considered to be the best diet after you
know all of my iterations and thinking
well this is probably how we ate as
humans
i still had this autoimmune condition i
still had
activation of my immune system so i kept
iterating and i kept thinking about it
and i
would sequentially cut out more and more
things from my diet and then i just ate
less and less plants in an effort to see
if that would affect my immunologic
activation and eczema and then it all
clicked when i heard jordan peterson on
joe rogan
and talking about the fact that he had
an autoimmune issue his daughter
michaela had an autoimmune issue and
they tried this thing which to me at the
time sounded crazy called a carnivore
diet it just sounded ludicrous because
throughout my functional medicine
education i'd been so steeped in this
idea that plants had these magical
compounds in them and they were really
valuable for humans
and so when i heard jordan and
michaela's stories i thought isn't that
interesting because the other piece of
the equation throughout this whole
journey for me was autoimmunity kept
coming up over and over
most of what we're dealing with outside
of hospitals outside of heart attacks
and people who are sick enough to go in
hospitals can really be seen or
formulated as autoimmune disease most
inflammation is autoimmune it's all
connected so that's when the immune
system reacts against itself that's what
eczema is that's what psoriasis do you
think that that uh a base cause of that
is the gut has become permeable and so
pieces of like errant proteins or
whatever actually getting into the
bloodstream and so the immune system is
freaking the [__] out i think that's
probably what's going on that was one of
those things i didn't quite like get why
isn't the immune system freaking out so
much like supposedly when you're eating
something you're essentially like
dropping it through a tube and it's
never actually in your body and all of a
sudden i was like how the [__] then is
the the body reacting so dramatically to
it the gut
when you eat food it's never really in
your body until it passes across your
intestinal wall but it eventually gets
in your body because we get nutrients so
at some point between here and here in
the magical nether regions i'm going to
take nutrients and molecules from my
food and i'm going to pass some
molecules out i'm going to take some
molecules and discard some molecules
and at some point in there there's this
delicate
barrier between our self and not self
and we know that outside of us is the
microbiome which is a broad term which
means trillions and trillions of
microorganisms bacteria fungi eukaryotic
organisms which are yeast probably some
protozoa organisms which are larger and
that is separated by oftentimes one cell
layer
and then our immune system the majority
of our defense system is right there in
a layer called the lamina propria and so
this is our diplomacy you know this is
our demilitarized zone this is where the
talks happen this is where the peace
accord happens and where sometimes
things get a little rowdy and i think
you're absolutely honest something there
and it's it's probably a very complex
dance between
our immune system the epithelial layer
and what's in our guts but i think that
in a very
in a simplified distilled way
i would suggest that most autoimmune
disease is due to antigens in the gut or
bacteria in our guts causing that
barrier to break down and then the
immune system gets triggered and goes on
alert and this is the interesting piece
we all have different susceptibilities
to that activated immune system so
everyone has genetic differences and i
think that the nuance is that when your
immune system gets activated your immune
system might go after your thyroid or
your
bowel if you have inflammatory bowel
disease like ulcerative colitis but when
my immune system gets activated it's
looking for my skin and this is why it
manifests differently in other people
and i think this is what western
medicine misses
it can all be the same trigger with
multiple different manifestations maybe
there's a lot of people
for whom plants could be triggering
autoimmunity wouldn't that be a wild
concept and wouldn't that challenge the
majority
of our nutritional norms today and that
is the beginning of thinking about
could humans just eat animals and as you
suggested
the response to that is okay don't eat
plants but it's much more nuanced than
just eating hamburgers or steaks in my
opinion and for that i think about it
from an ancestral perspective
and this you need to explain because
you're the first person i've ever heard
say because i'd never dove into the
carnivore diet before but you're the
first person i've ever heard say no no
from an evolutionary standpoint this is
probably how we ate and so i'd like to
know sort of the the main things that
that people throw out that our digestive
tract is clearly set up to do both that
our teeth are the teeth of an omnivore
like right how do you
show that that isn't true there's a lot
of nuance there and i think the
evolutionary discussions are always a
little bit
conjecture and the whole discussion here
is premised on the fact that what we did
in the past is what we should be doing
now and that is debatable as well i mean
some people in evolutionary biology
would debate how quickly humans can
adapt to things what we do know is that
humans have really only been
doing agrarian that is farming type
societies for about 10 to 12 000 years
this is called the neolithic revolution
but if we back up way further we can go
back 80 000 years and look at stable
nitrogen isotope studies of collagen
so basically they look at different
types of nitrogen in the bones of
neanderthal and homo sapiens and what
they see is so much nitrogen so the
ratio of the nitrogen gives us a sense
of what these people are eating because
we know that when we eat higher up the
food chain we accumulate more nitrogen
and what we see is that there is so much
nitrogen in those bones that those
people were essentially carnivores
meaning they were eating almost entirely
animal based diets and then if you look
back further two million years ago
again we're getting into the realm of
extreme paleoanthropology but pretty
good evidence if we look at the size of
the cranial vault of a human our brain
size had this logarithmic uptick two
million years ago that was when we were
homo erectus homo habilis and we also
see the uh the onset of stone tools and
evidence for hunting then so there's a
really compelling story you can put
together there that hunting animals
access to animal foods
made us human it made our brains go wow
and we got from
700 cc's in the cranial vault to about 1
500 ccs in the cranial vault in about a
million years the previous 30 million
years of primate evolution we'd stayed
about level at about 300 to 400 cc in
terms of the size of our brain there's
pretty good evidence that the bigger
your brain the more developed the
neocortex you have more complex
processing so i like the
the i get it's a narrative you're
putting it together maybe this maybe
that and it comes together and this is a
nice narrative that has internal logic
but one thing that seems certainly
plausible in that same internal logic is
if we pass through a primate evolution
and that we had you know
similar ancestry for a very long period
of time and as far as i know most
primates are designed to munch on a
bunch of leaves and [__] um and deal
with that if we started there then why
would we think that we swung all the way
to entirely carnivorous
and i think that this the interesting
thing here is in that brain size
that
we had eaten vegetables and there
actually are examples of primates eating
other primates the primates do eat
animals but we had had primarily a
vegetable based diet or a plant-based
diet for 35 million years of prime
evolution and then something happened
right and we became human and i think
that it was this
sudden access to nutrient density and
macronutrients that we hadn't seen
before
in higher quantities so we had much
higher quantity
fats so dha epa these omega-3 fats
there's lots of theories about what
causes expansion of the human brain and
i would argue much greater access to
micronutrients in the animal foods
because we were eating these much more
bioavailable foods that it was the
eating of the foods that made us human
but i think that what happened was if we
look at the stable nitrogen isotope
studies is they said our ancestors said
wait a minute this food animal food is
much better for us we can get more
calories that's really what they're
thinking about they don't care about
micronutrients but they're getting
micronutrients by accident because
they're eating essentially animals that
look like humans so by seeking out
better sources of calories namely bigger
animals with more fat they automatically
got
micronutrients that change the fate of
humanity forever right gives a bigger
brain and smarter and so then it became
this
risk benefit or just like a an
availability equation if i can go hunt a
woolly mammoth and i can get
a million cal i mean how many calories
in a wooly man like
millions and millions of calories it can
feed the tribe for a week or i can go
look for tubers
what am i gonna do right there's no
question what you're gonna do in terms
of calories and fat
i think that the point you make is well
taken and it gives us this really
interesting survival advantage because
we're not always going to be able to
hunt perfectly if you and i go out and
hunt
i guess today is different in terms of
the scarcity of animals but say we're on
the plains 30 000 years ago and we're
hunting if we don't come across a
buffalo we may not have any food today
or tomorrow and in that situation i
think the idea is that humans probably
still ate some plants but the plants
were probably just the survival food
that when you really look at
where humans get nutrients and this is
bioavailable micronutrients and where
humans would have gotten calories from
evolutionarily animals dwarf plants in
every way there aren't many people today
who are calorie deficient but there are
many humans that are micronutrient
deficient and so if we're talking about
micronutrient adequacy micronutrient
bioavailability this to me is the great
leveler it's so interesting
animal foods are far and away the
winners if you look at the
bioavailability and the presence of
vitamin a vitamin c vitamin e or the
micronutrients calcium zinc selenium
manganese or the dha and epa they're
just animal foods are the richest source
they're the best multivitamin we've ever
encountered so we're going to go hunt
that but evolutionarily i think that if
we couldn't get that we would eat some
plants
and they're going to tide us over in
terms of calories and they're going to
give us
sub-optimal micronutrients we know that
the micronutrients and plants are less
bioavailable
and so we can use them as survival food
kind of harkening back to our ancestry
but i think that what happened is we
became people who realized that animals
were the best source
of nutrients and that is kind of the
roots of the carnivore diet the stomach
and the digestive system is an
interesting story too again this is
conjectural but we'll entertain it if
you look at the ph of the human stomach
it's actually so acidic meaning low ph
it looks like carnivores it doesn't look
like an omnivore the ph of an ape is
about four or five i believe and our ph
is between one and two wow we have a
freaking boiling cauldron of acid in our
stomach our stomachs do not look like
omnivore stomachs and then you look at
the gut and there's this whole set of
ideas around the expensive tissue
hypothesis which is the idea that if you
look primate to human
the large intestine got much smaller and
the small intestine got much bigger
and the hypothesis suggests the
expensive tissue hypothesis suggests
that that was to allow for a big brain
because we have to shrink one thing the
large intestine to grow a bigger thing
somewhere else and then what we did in
the process was we evolved a larger
small intestine where we can absorb all
the micronutrients we were getting
different foods so it kind of is
consistent right we're getting
micronutrient rich food out of animals
plants are not that micronutrient rich
contrary to what we've been told we can
dig into it but
really the nutrients and plants are very
hard for our body to pull out they're
stuck they're kind of glued to the plant
molecules which don't look like human
molecules but a small intestine like
we've got is huge and voluminous and
redundant that's where we pull in the
nutrients the colon is pretty much where
we pull water out by the time stool gets
to the colon we'll probably get some
nutrients out but the majority we get
out in the small intestines so
what happens in the colon of an ape is
they ferment all this vegetable matter
into short chain fatty acids and then
they run on fat too but they make fat
out of carbohydrate we get our fat from
the animal and absorb it directly to the
small intestine so
that allows for a smaller colon a bigger
brain in terms of our energy and there's
a very interesting anecdote of a fish
it's called an elephant nose fish that
has a similar thing it has the largest
brain of any fish and it has the
smallest
large intestine of any fish so same idea
that sometimes there are trade-offs in
terms of brain and intestine size
that's really interesting because we're
trying to absorb more nutrients yeah
so all of this stuff i think i'm going
to make a really ignorant but bold
statement because i am not at all
qualified to
talk about the stuff like you are by any
stretch of the imagination but going
through what i'm going through with my
wife gives me uh a certain like i've
[__] done it and so like there's
little you can tell me
um my thing is you just experiment like
stop waiting for the data to come in
just because it's going to be so
individual anyway no matter what study i
publish it may work for you it may not
work for you just [__] try
so now let's get into the nitty-gritty
of a carnivore diet nose to tail what
does that mean how do i do it where do i
get this stuff right so how does one in
today's world eat
um a carnivore diet yeah
so it's i think tim ferriss has this
saying it's not simple but it's not
complex right
you imagine that you and i are out
hunting and we kill an antelope or we
kill a moose
a nose-to-tail approach to a carnivore
diet thinks i'm not just going to eat
the tenderloin and throw the rest of the
animal out we're going to eat every
piece of that animal because every piece
of that animal has calories and when you
think about it every piece of that
animal has micronutrients that are
unique and so you're going to eat the
cartilage you are going to eat the
cartilage
i do think that eating cartilage is a
valuable thing but
in talking to my clients over the last
year that i've been doing this
i've realized that there's like there's
like junior varsity and varsity versions
of carnival right and when people come
on the team you got to put them on the
jv team first unless they're super
gung-ho so i'm writing a book now and in
the book they'll be like tier one tier
two tier three etc i think that if
people get intimidated by the ideal
version of a carnivore diet they can
just think of like what is the doable
version of a carnivore diet but i want
them to understand the basic paradigm
because the most basic version of a
carnivore diet often goes wrong
because it's just too basic and that is
just eating the muscle meat which is
what we see in the grocery store so if
people want to try a carnivore diet for
30 days you really could almost get away
eating steak and eggs
i don't think that's ideal long term nor
do i think that's the best way for a
human to do it in terms of
micronutrients or macronutrients but the
simplest version
is steak and eggs or is that better than
hamburger and eggs probably the thing i
like about steak is that you can cook it
medium rare rare
and hamburgers like cooked all the way
through all the time you don't want to
cook out you cook out nutrients i'm
assuming you do cook out some of the
nutrients and so the nice thing about a
steak is you can get a steak that's rare
people like that and the inside and
that's better i think it's better in
terms of the nutrients in there so
you're trying it's interesting would you
eat something if you didn't have to
worry about microbial content would you
eat raw absolutely i've really i
personally and i don't recommend people
do this eat the majority of my diet raw
right now
no you should've seen you like raw eggs
i do eat raw eggs that's scary you're
freaking me out so the here's the thing
with eggs what we worry about with eggs
is contamination of camphor bacteria and
salmonella on the shell of the egg
correct the inside of the egg is
generally sterile it better be right
right wouldn't it have to be it has to
be and if it's not sterile you will know
because you'll open it it'll look like
something died in there which i did
essentially almost
so
when you eat the white of the yolk the
white of the egg i don't want to eat raw
because it has a compound called avidin
which binds biotin most of the avidin in
the egg white is denatured when you cook
it but there's some evidence that not
all of it is
and so what i'm interested is the most
amount of nutrients i really try to be a
fat hunter in my carnivore diet we can
get into the nitty-gritty of fat to
protein ratios but
i eat the yolk because the yolk is where
most of the nutrients are and i eat it
raw because i'm lazy and i just want to
eat it fast and it tastes good before we
get to that going back to your initial
hypothesis if you [__] found an egg
you were not going to not eat the egg
yolk or the egg white you were gonna eat
that whole [__] you know i
wonder what our ancestors would have
done you think they'd throw it out i
don't know if they they might not you're
right they might if i were in the
wilderness and i came across an egg i
would probably cook it and eat the whole
thing yes but i don't need extra protein
and so i'm just going to discard the
white eat the yolk and i eat it raw i'll
eat six to eight raw egg yolks a day i'm
not saying this is the way everybody
should do it do you just chug them do
you put them in a glass i just put them
in my hand and oh jam it down god so how
are you just letting the white sieve
through your fingers just goes right
through and then you can eat the yolk
rock this is don't have to eat the
yogurt you don't have a lot of friends
over when you're doing this do you this
is not table friendly dating is hard for
me man it's interesting wow okay so
we're pounding six to eight egg yolks
then we've got a steak chilling in the
fridge that we're gonna eat the next
thing i eat is liver culturally as
westerners we do not eat liver
i ate a little liver worse growing up
that probably saved me when i first
started eating liver i would gag and i
thought oh that's such a strong flavor
i'm not used to it and then gradually i
got to the point where i was like oh now
i'm adjusted too it's an acquired taste
for sure i watched like a documentary or
something about polar bears is it their
liver that has too much vitamin a or
something like that this is a urban
legend urban myth yeah so there's never
been a case report of vitamin a toxicity
from eating food
there have been case reports of vitamin
a toxicity people taking vitamin a
palmitate supplement but you can eat a
pretty decent amount of liver per day
and not have vitamin a toxicity
so i eat raw liver people can eat it
cooked and i'll do three ounces or four
ounces of raw liver per day so i ate the
egg yolks then i ate raw liver again
this is the super varsity version
and i put a little sea salt on it and
then you're gonna love this i've i've
gotten really interested in eating
organs and so
now i'm eating aldeny kidney
raw raw rock kidney yeah and then i'll
eat raw brain
whoa
what kind of brain
brain yeah why lamb just tastes better
uh cow brain is impossible to get
because of concerns about bovines
but you think about it evolutionarily
this is all my experiment right i'm the
end of one i want to know what this is
like so i can share with people
the brain and the bone marrow would have
been
i think things that we prize the most
brain is a delicacy in many countries
because it's rich in nutrients i mean
think about where the dha goes here
that's what we used to make it and think
about all the potentially unique factors
in the brain i'm not saying anyone needs
to have been hard as hell for a
normal animal though to crack that [__]
open like we'd be like the only ones
eating brains people have thought that
humans are some of the only animals to
do it there are accounts of lions doing
it a little bit but that may have been
part of our evolution that we had the
tools
and the smarts to get into the bone
marrow lions can crack a bone maybe it's
going to get bone marrow but that might
have been at the at the kill you know
you have an elephant
someone brings down an elephant
elephant's got a huge brain humans come
along as scavengers break open the skull
then you've got all that stuff and it
sounds gross to us really gross it
sounds completely gross but hey i want
to live forever and if i have to eat
elephant brain i'm going to do it
they die to natural causes only though i
want to be very clear about that
don't poach animals don't poach
elephants but it's been interesting for
me personally at this point in my
carnivore journey to try and eat more of
the animal and go past like that's gross
okay and so at that point i will eat a
steak you know and but a lot of times
there's this anthropological evidence
and this interesting historical evidence
of a lot of cultures eating the organs
first and then saving the muscle meat
for later or giving the muscle meat to
the dogs or other animals wow one of my
good friends in seattle mike mutzel has
chickens
so the raccoons got into his chickens
and what did the raccoons eat they ate
the viscera of the chickens and denny
anything else
they don't eat chicken breasts like we
do they eat the viscera because that's
where the fat and the organs are so i
thought well that's absolutely freaking
they eat the intestines they do wow
they do they eat it all because the
intestines are covered in fat
and there's like all this perinephric
fat around the kidneys and the omental
fat that's where the fat is on animal 2
is an abdomen yeah so it sounds gross
but i thought well what is in these
organs and how do we do it if
people are primarily grossed out or
probably grossed out about organs there
are ways to get organs they don't have
to eat them there are these desiccated
organ tablets which i think are a really
interesting
new sort of subset of a supplement
industry where you can take brain heart
liver spleen kidney thymus gallbladder
of an animal dehydrated at low
temperature and then put it in a pill
right do you actually get the nutrients
though if you if you [__] it up by
cooking it right i've got to imagine by
doing all that crazy processing that
nothing i want to study it and see how
much is in there but you know
desiccation is like low temperature
dehydration so they're like didn't know
they're like freezing it and then
pulling the water out that way so if
there's any way to do it that would be
the best way but that's a very valid
point it can't be as good as raw liver
which is clearly the best thing ever
yeah okay so let's get to um
well any uh i'm guessing that that's got
to cover most of what you're eating that
covers most of what i eat so give me
tier one so the basic carnivore diet is
probably meat and eggs right
you can do that all day long for 30 days
you'll be fine okay okay what what am i
missing micro nutrients yeah you're
mixing i i here's what i don't want i
don't want [__] where you have to
supplement like if somebody's giving me
a diet they're like bob but make sure
that you take the zinc the magnesium i
don't know it's like i want something
where what you're missing is liver
liver because it has
copper
biotin folate riboflavin okay so it's
got stuff i'm not going to find in there
there's a little bit of there's a
moderate amount of riboflavin and egg
yolk there's a moderate amount of
riboflavin in muscle meat but the
majority of the riboflavin is in the
liver if you wanted to make the simplest
nutri most nutrient rich carnivore diet
it would be meat eggs and liver meat
eggs and liver steak egg and liver would
be this the most 30 days 30 days 30 days
and then you could add things to that
you know if people want to eat other
things you can eat seafood right you can
eat chicken you can eat pork i can have
chicken yeah yeah chicken breast sure or
i have to have chicken liver no you can
have chicken breast
the carnivore diet is kind of this the
other another name for it which i
perhaps like a little more is a whole
foods animal-based diet whole foods
animal-based diet yep if it comes from
an animal you can think carnivore has a
pr problem oh i just want people to
understand that our ancestors ate fish
our ancestors ate scallops i wanted to
say shrimps those can all be on a
carnivore type diet in terms of the most
doable easy way this is it if you end up
liking it or your wife ends up doing it
long term there are other manifestations
i would make or other modifications i
would make when you hear when you go to
varsity
so i would include more organ meats just
different organs different organic heart
kidney heart yup the brain sounds
horrifying it's actually not that bad it
looks nasty it does but isn't that kind
of fun no not there are some things that
i get down because it's like this is
hard and i want to do it brain doesn't
make the list but i just asked people to
remember if you're
an ancestral person 80 000 years ago and
you kill an animal this is what you're
going to eat right and that doesn't mean
that's exactly what we have to be now
but it harkens back to these ideas of
maybe we should mirror this in some ways
or maybe there are here's my thing i i
am um
joe rogan has a quote that i love what's
the point of having [__] you money if
you never say [__] you so i am not at
all shy about like trying crazy [__] and
taking a real [__] stance like if if
it is true that what's causing the
immunological response the inflammation
is permeability of the gut and the
primary drivers of that are the
pesticides and the plant toxins that the
plant creates specifically so you don't
[__] eat it because it's stuck in the
ground then
we have as a society i think we have an
awesome
maybe even moral obligation to
do the animal industry in a way that is
um sustainable and cruelty free i think
that's really [__] important
so i actually wanted a vegan diet to be
the answer just so that i didn't have to
eat animals like that would be super rad
but if if the real [__] answer is
that this is the way that it has to be
then that's the way that it has to be i
think a lot of people wanted that i was
a vegan for a while i wanted a vegan
diet to be the answer to i don't think
any carnivores are going around saying i
want to kill animals have you ever
hunted no
it's a really life-changing experience
so i hunted with a bow a few years ago
when i lived in flagstaff
there's a spirituality when you're in
the natural world and i think that our
ancestors would actually give you that
much to my dismay i will acknowledge
that right i think that there's an
animism around this and we talk to the
universe and
we talk to animals and we say look i
need to live thank you for the sacrifice
and when you kill an animal it's like
that animal gave itself to you that i
respect and you and and when i killed a
deer
i saw that deer and the first thing i
thought was oh [__] i did like and the
the next thing i thought was i better be
a good person
and in retrospect i think that's really
cool
i would probably be a better person if i
did that more that's really interesting
and i'm eating really i'm eating the
same amount of animals you know
and
divorcing humans from the collection of
those animals
makes us not have the responsibility it
pardons us of the responsibility of
killing the animal understanding what
that means to kill an animal
can can we go somewhere super weird for
a second pretend like we're not filming
this
um
i don't want an apocalypse to happen i
think that'd be really really [__]
bad but
should the apocalypse happen what's
interesting to me is that i i don't
wanna now and i'm open to changing my
mind but i don't wanna hunt now because
i don't need to to survive right and so
it would be very distressing for me to
take a life
um without like real imperative but that
spiritual sense of we're all part of
some grand cycle
is
really interesting it's also interesting
because like when you
getting in touch with your animal nature
that's something i had to learn to do so
i like growing up as a kid was very soft
emotionally weak and so like i really
had to toughen up i really had to get um
you know lean into like what does it
mean to be a man i define that for
myself i'm not i'm not trying to project
on anybody else but for me like that was
a thing that i had to do and i never
took up i did super super briefly but i
was too emotionally weak to deal with it
i never took up like a martial sport or
anything like that
and so
in this
apocalypse that i hope never comes right
where i actually need to hunt and kill
and can do it in a part of a group and
feeling like dude there's some real [__]
on the line here
do it in a respectful way but also in a
way like i'm [__] fighting to survive
because let me tell you that deer did
not give itself that deer was [__]
trying everything and it could in his
power not to die and so that like the
like this [__] matters this is actually
a matter of life and death and to
know that we're on the hook like that
and to and to take the mantle of i'm
going to go and do this and i think
about this this is one of the most
interesting things about being a ceo
that nobody talks about is you're saying
i'm responsible for the life and death
of this company i'm responsible for you
being able to pay your [__] rent and
to go home and feed your family like i
take that [__]
yes and like just to go when i go into a
meeting i have the chills when i go into
a meeting like you know trying to level
up the company and all that i i'm like
carrying that with me of like your
warrior my face has a chills of like i'm
going into this as a representative of
this group and it really [__] matters
and failure matters success matters and
like being able to walk into that
scenario connect to the fight for
survival like that to connect to the
animal in that
you didn't want to necessarily give your
life but i'm going to show you so much
respect and that notion of like i
actually want to be a better person i
just [__] took a life and like it
needs to matter it needs to mean
something i need to do something with
that it's [__] interesting man and i
think that that's the way i felt and i
forget it because i don't hunt as much
as i want to anymore and i'm going to
hunt this fall i've decided and it's
going to be a different experience for
me because i know that i'm going to eat
every piece of that animal and i'm going
to butcher that animal myself and i'm
gonna take that animal respectfully and
i think i know what's gonna happen is
every time i eat that animal i'm gonna
remember all the time i spent who i was
with
and the moment i took the animal and all
the time i spent looking for that animal
and i'll tell you what i think i'm gonna
be much less likely to like be an
[__] to somebody in traffic or
get miffed at the grocery store it's
just this reminder like hey you're alive
and you should be grateful for that
because the fundamental idea is that in
order for something to live something
else must die that is the way of the
natural world and that does not mean
that it's a bad thing and this goes back
to kind of taoist and buddhist concepts
like
death is only bad when we're thinking
about it from like a western perspective
perhaps death is just the completion of
a life
and it's a cycle and it's moving but
when we when we take a life when i took
a life
it really enforced on me the fact that
the rest of my life should be an honor
to that animal that i just sort of
consumed and took on their energy from
like and i should live well
dude i could have you back
i had so much fun doing this thank you
so much where can people find you so i
have a podcast called fundamental health
with paul saladino and
i talk about all kinds of cool health
stuff it's not just the carnivore diet i
though i really believe a carnivore diet
is an optimal diet for many people i try
to really talk about all kinds of cool
stuff on that podcast how do people live
a well intentioned and healthy life and
then my website
is
carnivoremd.com all my stuff is on the
website
you can find links to my instagram my
twitter and everything but carnivore md
is my website fundamental health is my
podcast i like it that's amazing if you
were going to have people make one
change that you think would have the
biggest impact on their health what
change would you have them make there
are two answers to this the
big answer is
buddhism in the sense that mindfulness
right
mindfulness and not buddhism per se but
mindfulness
i would congratulate any person that
makes an intentional choice
with regard to exercise lifestyle sleep
diet anything even if that choice isn't
a vegan diet or a plate like making an
intentional choice in your life
i think is the first step to health
the second thing from a carnivore
perspective would be eat more
well-raised animal products which are
very nutrient rich
and that i think will create more
nutrient density and that will improve
people's health and then there can be
this gradual decrease in plants or you
don't even have to really decrease
plants if you don't want to
you can just increase the amount of
nose-to-tail animal products and you're
getting more of the nutrients you're
getting the best multivitamin and that's
i think the beginning of the molecular
health but the mental health the
spiritual health i think comes first
i love it yeah dude thank you so much
for being on here this was amazing total
pleasure brother guys i had so much fun
uh researching him check him out and
this was definitely one of my favorite
episodes i hope you like it if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential